JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: With
only three
weeks to go until Iowa voters
kick off the
2016 presidential primary
season, the race
tightens between two leading
Democrats and
among Republicans, all part of
Politics Monday.
Then: actor Sean Penn's meeting
with drug
lord El Chapo and ethical
questions around
the "Rolling Stone" article.
And
remembering legendary singer,
artist and writer
David Bowie, who transformed
rock music over
decades.
ANTHONY DECURTIS, "Rolling
Stone": Bowie never
seemed old, you know? That sense
of reinvention
really made him seem of the time
at every
time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gunmen burst into
a shopping
mall in Iraq today, killing at
least 18 people
and wounding 40 others. The
Islamic State
group claimed responsibility for
the attack
in Baghdad. It began with a car
bomb and suicide
blast at the Jawhara Mall. That
touched off
a 90-minute gun battle before
security forces
gained control. To the north,
another suicide
attack killed two dozen people.
Ten more were
killed in other bombings.
Food and medicine finally got
through today
to a Syrian town that's slowly
starving to
death. An aid convoy was allowed
in under
an agreement with pro-government
forces who
have blockaded the place.
Lindsey Hilsum of Independent
Television News
has the story.
LINDSEY HILSUM: At last. This
morning, Red
Crescent trucks headed towards
the besieged
town of Madaya, carrying tinned
food, rice,
lentils, and other supplies, all
desperately
needed.
The people waited. They haven't
had a food
delivery like this for three
months. Five
more died of hunger or
hunger-related diseases
yesterday. Aid workers went in
first. Food
is a weapon of war in Syria. And
the U.N.
and Red Crescent have carefully
negotiated
with both government and rebels.
Anything
can go wrong at the last minute.
And this
is just a stopgap.
MAN (through translator): People
are very
happy today because the food has
arrived,
but they're worried and upset
because they're
still under siege. The town
isn't yet open
to the world, so the human
disaster we have
witnessed could happen again in
two weeks'
time.
LINDSEY HILSUM: Under the
agreement, emergency
aid is being delivered from the
Syrian capital,
Damascus, both to Madaya, which
is held by
rebels, while besieged by Syrian
government
forces and Hezbollah, and to the
Shia villages
in the north, near Idlib, Foua
and Kefraya,
which are besieged by the rebel
group Ahrar
Al Sham.
The rebels surround the
villages, and although
there isn't the same level of
hunger there
as in Madaya, the people, who
are mostly government
supporters, are trapped, unable
to leave.
As darkness fell this evening,
the convoys
finally got permission from all
sides to enter
Madaya. The World Food Program
hopes to provide
enough to feed 40,000 people in
the area for
one month. That's just a tenth
of the number
of Syrians who urgently need
food aid this
winter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United
Nations says that
4.5 million Syrians are in need
of humanitarian
aid.
Germany's leaders today
condemned retaliatory
violence against immigrants. Six
Pakistanis
and a Syrian were assaulted
Sunday in Cologne,
as tensions flared over New
Year's Eve attacks,
mostly carried out by migrants.
Meanwhile,
Turkey said that it plans to
offer work permits
to Syrian refugees so that fewer
of them will
try to get to Europe.
In Pakistan, new efforts began
to revive long-stalled
peace talks in neighboring
Afghanistan. Representatives
from Afghanistan, China, the
U.S. and Pakistan
met late into the night in
Islamabad. The
four nations didn't invite the
Taliban to
the session, but Pakistani
officials said
it's vital to bring the
militants into the
fold.
SARTAJ AZIZ, Foreign Affairs to
Pakistani
Prime Minister: The primary
objective of the
reconciliation process is to
create conditions
to bring the Taliban groups to
the negotiating
table and offer them incentives
that can persuade
them to move away from using
violence as a
tool for pursuing political
goals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Taliban said
today that
it will not agree to any direct
talks with
Afghanistan without first
talking to the United
States.
Back in this country, on Wall
Street, stocks
managed small gains, despite oil
prices falling
to just over $31 a barrel. That
is the lowest
in 12 years. The Dow Jones
industrial average
gained 52 points to close near
16400. The
Nasdaq fell five points, and the
S&P 500 added
a point.
And the Ringling Bros. and
Barnum & Bailey
Circus has announced that it's
retiring all
of its touring elephants in May.
That's a
year-and-a-half earlier than
originally planned,
and it comes as more cities are
banning events
involving elephant acts. The
pachyderms will
go to live at the company's
conservation center
in Florida.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Bernie Sanders
closing the gap in Iowa; the
legacy of superstar
David Bowie; mandatory union
dues before the
Supreme Court; and much more.
David Bowie; mandatory union
dues before the
Supreme Court; and much more.
With just three weeks to go
until the nation's
first early voting contests in
Iowa, the polls
are narrowing and many of the
presidential
candidates are sharpening their
attacks.
On the Democratic side today,
Hillary Clinton
stressed the differences within
the Democratic
field, while Bernie Sanders
pushed his core
populist message to potential
Hawkeye State
voters.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
You can run a strong and, I
believe, winning
campaign without asking Wall
Street or the
drug companies or millionaires
and billionaires
for their support. You can go to
ordinary
people who want real change in
this country
and you can do it with the
support of the
middle class of this country.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
As you begin to think about the
caucus and
read about what we're each
saying and talk
to your friends and neighbors, I
think it's
time for us to have the kind of
spirited debate
that you deserve us to have.
Again, we're
so much better than the
Republicans, but we
do have differences, and you
deserve to know
what those differences are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's get
into some of
those differences now on this
Politics Monday.
Reporting from the trial,
they're both in
Iowa tonight, Tamara Keith of
NPR and Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
And I hope you are both indoors,
because I
know it's cold outside.
We are seeing a tightening of
the race today,
Amy, new poll out today showing
Bernie Sanders
has caught up to within three
points of Hillary
Clinton. That's an NBC/Wall
Street Journal/Marist
poll.
Do we understand why this race
is tightening?
What's behind these numbers?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
the Hillary Clinton campaign
will tell you,
in fact, they have told us since
the very
beginning of this race, that
they expected
this was going to be tight all
along. Of course,
all candidates say that.
But we know why it's going to be
tight. It's
because the same dynamics are in
play this
year as they were back in 2007
and 2008. Back
then, Hillary Clinton did best
among those
people who traditionally come in
caucus, older
voters. She did much better with
women, where
Barack Obama did better with
independents
and younger people, people who
don't necessarily
show up to caucus.
This same dynamic is playing out
here in 2016,
but Bernie Sanders playing the
role of Barack
Obama and Hillary Clinton
playing the role
of herself again. And so the
question on caucus
night will come down to exactly
who comes
out to vote, which, of course,
none of us
can know until that night.
But if it's a big number of
people that come
out, including people who don't
traditionally
show up on a Monday in February,
then this
race will indeed be very close.
If it's more
of the traditional kind of
Democratic voters
that show up every year, then
Hillary Clinton,
I think, will have an easier
time winning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Tamara, is
this tightening
changing the way these
candidates talk to
the voters and what they're
saying?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: I don't
know if it's the tightening
that's doing it
or the limited time left on the
calendar,
but they are definitely talking
in a different
way than they have before.
In particular, Hillary Clinton
is much more
pointed in the way she talks
about Bernie
Sanders than she has been in the
past. And
just let me give you a little
example, which
is an argument they're now
having about guns.
This came up back in October,
and Hillary
Clinton talked about Bernie
Sanders' position
on immunity or some level of
immunity for
gun makers and gun dealers, but
she never
really called him out by name.
Now she's saying Bernie Sanders
supported
this thing when it came up in
2005 in Congress.
He's open to possibly changing
his position
on it or revisiting it, but he
hasn't changed
his position yet. And she is
saying, Barack
Obama, the president and I, we
want to take
away this immunity. Bernie
Sanders, calling
him out by name, doesn't want
to.
That's very different that she
-- they're
talking about each other now by
name, and
they're talking very
specifically about issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Amy, I saw
this afternoon
her campaign put out a statement
about that
she wants to put a surcharge on
multimillionaires.
It's very clear what she's
trying to -- whose
attention she's trying to get.
AMY WALTER: Exactly.
And I was at a Bernie Sanders
event today
here in Iowa. And what was
interesting, to
Tamara's point, you know,
Hillary Clinton
seems to have sharpened her
attacks on Bernie
Sanders, whereas Bernie seems to
be the sort
of subtler, gentler attacker
here, still refusing
to call her out. He calls her
out, but not
quite as pointedly.
He continues to mention the fact
that he's
never run negative ads in his
time as a candidate,
suggesting he's not going to do
it this time.
He wants to win on the merits of
the debate.
But there's no question that, in
talking to
Bernie Sanders' supporters, they
feel like,
no matter what, they have won
because they
have forced Hillary Clinton to
move to their
position. They see a more
liberal position,
and, specifically, of course, on
this last
issue, on economic inequality.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tamara, they
must -- the
Sanders people must think that
this sort of,
as you put it, soft response is
working for
them.
TAMARA KEITH: It's very much
Bernie Sanders'
personality. It's the persona
that he's had
as a candidate throughout his
political career,
and he doesn't intend to change
that.
That said, he is willing to go
there on issues.
He has been calling on Clinton
to support
a bill on paid family leave that
he's a co-sponsor
of, along with Kirsten
Gillibrand and other
senators. Clinton says, I
support paid family
leave just like you do, but she
wants to pay
for it in a different way.
So I think that -- and with that
tax proposal,
Bernie Sanders' campaign came
out and said
that won't be enough, what
Clinton is proposing.
So I think they are starting to
get chippy
on issues themselves, and I
think we can expect
to see them fighting about taxes
in the weeks
ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I like that word,
chippy.
So, guess who else is...
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Guess who else is
talking about
Bernie Sanders? None other than
Donald Trump
had something to say about him
today. This
is part of what Mr. Trump said.
Let's listen.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I want to run against Bernie.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Oh, that's a dream
come true.
This guy, he would make some
president -- 90
percent tax, everybody. Does
anybody mind
paying 90 percent tax? Because
you go with
Bernie, you're going to have
yourself a nice
90 percent tax. He wants to take
it all away
from you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, Mr.
Trump still has
other Republican candidates to
worry about,
but he is talking about Bernie
Sanders.
AMY WALTER: Well, two things
going on here.
One, Donald Trump always has to
be part of
whatever the talking points are.
So he wanted
get himself into what is a
debate between
Bernie Sanders and Hillary
Clinton and make
sure nobody forgot about him. He
inserts himself.
But the other piece goes to what
Bernie Sanders
is talking about a lot more now,
which is
that he is the more electable
candidate. For
a long time, the conventional
wisdom has been,
well, Hillary Clinton, she may
have a tough
time with very liberal voters,
but she is
a better general election
candidate.
Bernie Sanders points to these
recent polls
that you, Judy, pointed out,
specifically
from the Marist poll, that shows
that Bernie
Sanders is beating Donald Trump
handily in
New Hampshire, whereas Hillary
Clinton is
only up by one point. Bernie
Sanders is now
saying, I'm the more electable
candidate.
Now, to be sure, nobody has
talked about Bernie
Sanders yet. This issue that
Donald Trump
brought up about 90 percent tax,
we will hear
a lot about the amount of
spending and where
it's coming. From should Bernie
Sanders be
the nominee, it will be a very
tough road
for him. Those numbers will
change.
That said, I think what Donald
Trump is trying
to do is to say, whoa, whoa,
whoa, don't let
Bernie Sanders put the cart
before the horse
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, about 45
seconds left,
Tamara.
But fill us in on, where does
the Republican
race stand right now in Iowa?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, it's sort of
a neck-and-neck
situation, depending on which
poll you look
at, between Donald Trump and Ted
Cruz, Ted
Cruz being the senator from
Texas.
And Ted Cruz has really
consolidated the evangelical
vote, and Donald Trump seems to
be getting
almost all of the rest. And
Trump, I think,
today even speculated as to why
some of those
people who are so far behind in
the polls
don't just drop out. So, there
you have it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're just
watching,
along with the two of you. We're
glad you're
there as our eyes and ears.
Tamara Keith, Amy Walter, good
luck on the
trail. Thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: Thank you.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And while the
candidates jockey
for position and try to win over
voters, the
bipartisan group called No
Labels is still
hammering away at its goal of
bringing the
parties together.
Today, they announced
Republicans Ben Carson,
Chris Christie, John Kasich,
Rand Paul, and
Donald Trump, and one Democrat,
Martin O'Malley,
have all signed a pledge to work
toward the
No Labels policy agenda, which
calls for creating
jobs, securing Social Security
and Medicare,
balancing the federal budget,
and making the
United States energy-secure.
A short time ago, I spoke with
the group's
co-chairs, former Connecticut
Senator Joe
Lieberman and former Utah
Governor Jon Huntsman.
Senator Lieberman, Governor
Huntsman, thank
you for joining us.
So, you have five Republicans
and one Democrat
who have signed this pledge.
What exactly
are they pledging to do,
Governor Huntsman?
JON HUNTSMAN (R), Former Utah
Governor: Well,
they are pledging to embrace a
process for
goal-setting and leadership in a
bipartisan
fashion, drawing from the
elements of a national
strategic agenda, which include
four big policy
categories, jobs, entitlements,
energy, and
a balanced budget.
And, essentially, every one of
the six candidates,
a very diverse group, I might
add, they are
stating that they will support
the national
strategic agenda, and, number
two, they will
sit down and meet with a
bipartisan group
of congressional leaders within
30 days of
being elected to the presidency,
and, third,
to establish a goal of drawing
from one of
those big issue categories and
leading out
in a bipartisan fashion in
delivering what
the American people really are
looking for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator
Lieberman, hearing
this, aren't these, though, the
kind of general
goals stated in a broad-brush
way that just
about anyone could agree to?
JOE LIEBERMAN (D), Former U.S.
Senator: Well,
that's exactly the way we framed
them, because
we're operating from the premise
that we're
trying to disrupt the
dysfunction in the Washington
political system.
We're trying to create some
incentives for
people to work together, and one
of the best
ways is to have people agree at
least on commonly
held goals. That's the four
policy areas.
So, really, left, right, center,
Democrat,
Republican, should agree on the
goals, and
then for these presidential
candidate to promise,
if they get elected that, within
the first
30 days in office, they will
call members
of Congress, both parties in, to
begin negotiating
to get something done on at
least one of the
goals.
Frankly, I'm surprised all that
15 of the
current presidential candidates
didn't sign
on to this. I'm grateful that
the six did,
but I'm puzzled that the other
nine haven't,
and we're going to continue to
pursue them
to make our case that it's not
asking much
for them to pledge, promise to
work together
across party lines, which hasn't
happened
very much in Washington lately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor
Huntsman, though,
at the same time, isn't it the
case -- the
fact that candidates from
different parties,
say, a conservative Republican,
is going to
have a very different concept of
what it means
to secure Social Security and
Medicare than
is a liberal Democrat?
JON HUNTSMAN: And that, Judy, is
the beauty
of governing. And that's what
this process
is so important.
That's what I had to do as a
governor of a
state. You create a vision. You
put forward
ideas. You build bipartisan
coalitions and
you manage it through to
fruition. It's been
a long time since we have put
points on the
board in terms of getting big,
important things
done for the American people.
I can remember in the '80s, when
Ronald Reagan
did so with Speaker Tip O'Neill.
They set
a goal around Medicare, Social
Security and
tax reform. And I remember in
the '90s, when
Bill Clinton and Newt Gingrich,
then speaker
of the House, they too set a
goal. Differing
widely from an ideological
standpoint, they
took two respectively different
pathways to
the end point, but you know
what? They got
there.
So, you have to set the goal
first and expect
that people on both sides are
going to negotiate,
compromise and ultimately figure
out a way
to get there. That's all part of
the process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Senator
Lieberman, you're
not underestimating how far
apart these candidates,
many of them are, on these
fundamental questions?
JOE LIEBERMAN: In a sense, we
are, through
No Labels, in a very different
way expressing
the anger, the frustration that
so many Americans
feel about how the American
government has
gone off the track.
And it is being expressed by a
lot of these
candidates with anger as well.
But, in the
end, you got to be more than
angry. You got
to be willing, history tells us,
to work with
people in the other party to get
something
done. And we're trying to create
a vehicle
for the voters to send that
message loud and
clear to the presidential
candidates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Governor
Huntsman, finally,
though, can you really hold
these candidates
accountable?
JON HUNTSMAN: The American
people will do
just that. I have no doubt.
The country is hungry for this
kind of sense
of bipartisan problem-solving.
They're turning
out. And you better believe
they're turning
out to the town hall meetings
and will be
right up until the primary, and
they're going
to hold the candidates
accountable, ultimately.
And that's why creating the
vehicle, which
we have done through No Labels,
is exactly
what needs to be done. There is
no other movement
quite like it. We're
Republicans. We're Democrats.
We're independents. We have
different affiliations,
but we all agree on the
necessity of problem-solving
in order to get the work of the
American people
done. And that's what's been
missing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Jon
Huntsman, Senator
Joe Lieberman, we thank you
both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Jon
Huntsman, Senator
Joe Lieberman, we thank you
both.
One of the most influential and
revolutionary
musical artists of his
generation, David Bowie,
died yesterday after an 18-month
battle with
cancer.
In a career that spanned more
than five decades,
the sale of more than 140
million albums,
and included an ever-changing
and sometimes
androgynous look that led to
glam rock and
many other iconic moments, David
Bowie remained
an original to the end.
Jeffrey Brown has our
remembrance.
JEFFREY BROWN: Constantly
changing, but somehow
always uniquely himself, David
Bowie was one
JEFFREY BROWN: Constantly
changing, but somehow
always uniquely himself, David
Bowie was one
of the culture's heroic figures
for decades,
appearing in many guises, shapes
and forms,
leaving a mark on rock music and
well beyond.
He was born David Jones in South
London in
1947, and rose to fame first in
1969 as Major
Tom in the hit song "Space
Oddity," and then,
memorably, in the early '70s as
another otherworldly
character, Ziggy Stardust.
"Rolling Stone" music critic
Anthony DeCurtis:
ANTHONY DECURTIS, "Rolling
Stone": Suddenly,
here's David Bowie, kind of a
much more complex,
subversive figure than many of
those artists
were. And he really gave a lot
of energy for
what was going to drive music,
well, until
now, really, but certainly
through the '70s.
When he came on the scene, it
was like, this
is the future.
NARRATOR: Nothing you have seen
or heard about
David Bowie will prepare you.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 1976, Bowie
stepped into
another artistic world, acting
as the pale
alien in the film "The Man Who
Fell to Earth."
Then, in the '80s, he became a
music video
and fashion icon, cementing his
mainstream
pop star status with a string of
hits, telling
his fans, let's dance. His range
of pursuits,
pop star status with a string of
hits, telling
his fans, let's dance. His range
of pursuits,
very much including a visual
sensibility,
also attracted those in the art
world.
Michael Darling is with
Chicago's Museum of
Contemporary Art, which hosted
an exhibition
on Bowie.
MICHAEL DARLING, Chicago Museum
of Contemporary
Art: The thing that made Bowie
such a good
subject for a museum exhibition
is the variety
of his output. We had costumes.
We had stage
designs, graphic designs,
handwritten lyrics,
and things like that.
JEFFREY BROWN: The range, the
showmanship,
playfulness all were hugely
influential. Madonna
spoke to it when Bowie was
inducted into the
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in
1996.
MADONNA, Musician: Before I saw
David Bowie
live, I was your normal,
dysfunctional, rebellious
teenager from the Midwest. And
he has truly
changed my life.
JEFFREY BROWN: Today, other
musicians and
artists spoke to Bowie's
influence, including
some of the day's biggest stars.
ANTHONY DECURTIS: It's one thing
to be influential
in rock 'n' roll, but when you
start affecting
the pop world -- and by that, I
mean people
like Madonna or Lady Gaga --
Bowie was an
extremely important figure for
them.
This idea that you could
continually reinvent
yourself, that every time you
stepped out
on the stage, it was a stage,
and which character
are you going to be playing?
That was anybody's
guess. Bowie never seemed old.
That sense
of reinvention really made him
seem of the
time at every time.
MICHAEL DARLING: So many artists
these days
are working across different
media. They're
making videos. They're doing
performances.
They're painting. They're taking
photographs.
And David Bowie was already, you
know, as
early as the 1960s, doing that
kind of work.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tributes also
came from fans,
some at a mural in his hometown,
even some
from very high places, such as
British Prime
Minister David Cameron.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: David
Bowie was a genius. For someone
of my age,
he provided a lot of the
soundtrack of our
lives.
JEFFREY BROWN: Bowie was married
for more
than 20 years to the supermodel
Iman, with
whom he had a daughter. He also
had a son
from a previous marriage.
He had remained active in recent
years, he'd
kept working. The song "Lazarus"
appears on
his last album, a collaboration
with a jazz
quartet called "Blackstar,"
which was released
this past Friday, on Bowie's
birthday.
David Bowie died of cancer
Sunday night. He
was 69 years old.
David Bowie died of cancer
Sunday night. He
was 69 years old.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
ethics of
interviewing an infamous drug
lord; how college
players continue to play
football despite
bans after they have had
concussions; and
the power of poetry in a
juvenile detention
center.
But, first, to the Supreme
Court.
Today, the justices heard
arguments involving
a group of California
schoolteachers and a
major teachers union, in a case
that could
have wide ramifications for
organized labor.
The question: Can teachers who
aren't union
members be required to pay some
union dues?
Our regular Marcia Coyle of "The
National
Law Journal" was in the
courtroom today, and
she's here with us now to tell
us more.
Marcia, before I begin, I have
to say, you
and I were just talking about
David Bowie,
and you said you remembered
something special.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
I do.
I remember his duet with Bing
Crosby on a
Crosby Christmas special, when
he sang "Peace
on Earth" and Bing Crosby sang
"Little Drummer
Boy." And it was just a really
beautiful duet,
a moment, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another testament
to his versatility.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes, definitely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I had to ask you
about that.
So, this case involving the
teachers in California...
MARCIA COYLE: No singing in the
Supreme Court
today.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: No singing today.
MARCIA COYLE: No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is a case
with some history.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
In 1977, the Supreme Court
upheld a state
law that required unions, which
at the time
were the exclusive bargaining
agent and had
to represent all public
employees in that
unit, it allowed those unions to
collect -- or
it required those unions to
collect so-called
agency shop fees in order to
cover their share
of the collective bargaining
costs, even though
they were non-members of the
union.
The Supreme Court at the time
said that the
interference with their First
Amendment speech
and association rights were
justified for
two reasons. Government
employers wanted labor
peace. They didn't want to be
negotiating
with multiple representatives
with often conflicting
demands.
And, also, the government
employers wanted
to avoid free riders, those
non-union members
who would get the benefits of
collective bargaining
without sharing in the cost.
Fast-forward
almost 40 years. The Supreme
Court has two
cases, one in 2012, another in
2014, both
by Justice Alito, casting doubt
on whether
that 1977 decision was really
good law.
And into that doubt stepped some
smart lawyers,
anti-union lawyers who created a
case that
would challenge that 1977
decision head on.
And that's the case the court
heard today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, tell us how
it unfolded
today, the main arguments. And
how did the
justices respond?
MARCIA COYLE: OK.
First up would be the 10
California public
school teachers who are
objecting to paying
any fees to the union. The -- I
saw in the
court what I would call a clear
ideological
divide. You had the more
conservative justices
being very skeptical of the
union's claims
that the interests served by
that 1977 decision
really did comport or really did
justify the
First Amendment encroachment by
the agency
shop fees.
Justice Kennedy was the most
critical voice,
I think, during the arguments.
He said this
was compelled speech, and what
the unions
were doing were creating
compelled riders,
not free riders, but compelled
riders.
You also had the chief justice
and Justices
Alito and Justice Scalia
questioning the line
that the court in 1977 drew
between collective
bargaining activities, for which
unions could
collect the fees, and unrelated
activities
that were more political.
Justice Scalia said everything
that is collectively
bargained with the government
has a political
component to it. On the other
side, you had
justices like Justice Ginsburg,
Kagan, Sotomayor
demanding of the California
teachers who are
challenging this a special
justification for
overruling a 1977 precedent
that's been around
40 years, and, as Justice Kagan
said, tens
of thousands of contracts,
affecting maybe
10 million people have been in
place because
of that 1977 decision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia, something
-- in fact,
a fair amount has been written
about whether
this is going to have broader
repercussions.
Did that come up in the
arguments today?
MARCIA COYLE: It did.
In fact, Justice Ginsburg said,
if this 1977
precedent falls, so, too, will
the court's
decisions upholding similar
required fees,
for example, that lawyers play
-- pay in mandatory
bar associations, and even
student activity
fees paid in public
universities.
But there is a disagreement
between the two
sides over the impact. The
teachers challenging
the fees, their lawyers say, no,
unions will
continue to go on. There are 25
states that
don't have agency shop fees and
their unions
continue to exist and thrive.
The other side, the unions, say,
no, this
is a major blow. We use this
money to do things
like train teachers, train
firefighters in
other types of unions, provide
equipment that
maybe counties and local
governments can't
afford. So they see this as a
real weakening
and a blow if that 1977 decision
falls.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, this one
has been watched
closely. And we're going to be
seeing a lot
more of you soon.
MARCIA COYLE: It is going to be
a very big
end of term, Judy, so I'm sure I
will be back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We can't wait.
Marcia Coyle, thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
and Mexico
are now trying to determine how
to have the
recently-captured drug kingpin
El Chapo extradited
from Mexico to the U.S.
This weekend, "Rolling Stone"
magazine published
a story about El Chapo that
could have come
straight out of a Hollywood
screenplay. It
was written and reported by
actor Sean Penn,
who secretly visited the drug
kingpin in Mexico
before he'd been captured. But
some are questioning
the ethics of "Rolling Stone"'s
methods.
Our William Brangham has more.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: "Rolling
Stone"'s article
was the very first time the
public has heard
from Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman
directly. The
meeting between the drug lord
and Sean Penn
was set up by another actor,
Kate del Castillo,
one of Mexico's most famous TV
stars.
"Rolling Stone" gave the drug
kingpin fugitive
final approval of the piece.
Sean Penn did
spend an evening with Guzman.
But Guzman's
quotes in the piece came from a
video recording
after the actor sent him
questions.
According to the magazine, this
photo accompanied
the story for authentication
purposes, proof
that the two had met.
Joining me for more on this is
Angela Kocherga.
She's the borderlands bureau
director for
Cronkite News at Arizona PBS and
a professor
at the Cronkite School of
Journalism.
Angela, thank you for joining
us.
I wonder if you could just tell
me, what was
your first reaction when you saw
the Sean
Penn piece in "Rolling Stone"?
ANGELA KOCHERGA, Cronkite News:
Well, I thought,
if anyone had gone to a
Hollywood producer
with this scenario, they would
have been laughed
out of the room, but, of course,
this was
the reality.
You have this very famous
Mexican actress.
You have this Sean Penn, an
actor/activist,
and then you have got the most
wanted man
in Mexico meeting in this jungle
hideaway.
So, it was surprising.
But the more difficult part of
this for journalists
was that it raised some very
troubling issues
about access and what
constitutes real journalism,
as opposed to more of a
conversation, rather
than what they're calling an
interview.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, let's
talk about some
of those issues.
As we mentioned, "Rolling Stone"
granted El
Chapo final approval of the
piece. The magazine
points out that they didn't --
he says he
didn't actually want anything
changed. But
that's not a very common
practice for journalists
to grant their subjects.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: No.
And, unfortunately, that's not a
ringing endorsement
of hard-hitting journalism, when
your main
subject gives it the green light
without changing
a single word. In Mexico,
unfortunately, this
is a reality. Self-censorship is
a tool of
survival. Many, many
journalists, colleagues
in Mexico, have to censor
themselves in order
to survive.
News organizations, individual
journalists
have had to flee for their
lives. Others have
been kidnapped and killed in
Mexico for covering
organized crime and official
corruption, which
often intersects. So, this is
really a very
troubling thing, treated as kind
of an entertainment-style
news story, when we have people
dying, journalists
in Mexico risking their lives to
bring their
readers and viewers the truth.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, do you
think the public
is served in any way by Sean
Penn's -- quote,
unquote -- "interview" with El
Chapo?
ANGELA KOCHERGA: I think if it
had been characterized
as more of a conversation. The
actual content
of the interview really doesn't
reveal anything
new.
We get to see El Chapo and we
hear it in his
own words, but, I mean, he's
basically just
admitting, yes, I'm sending
unknown amounts,
I mean, giant amounts of drugs,
heroin, meth,
and every other kind of drug,
across the border.
But it's more the story behind
the story that's
fascinating, the fact that you
have a Hollywood
actor and a Mexican soap opera
star who plays
a queenpin, a drug queenpin, in
a soap opera
in Mexico finding their way into
this jungle
hideaway, at the invitation of
Mexico's most
wanted man.
That story, how they were able
to get there
-- and there are photos on --
from Mexican
paparazzi that actually show the
two arriving
in Mexico. So, it doesn't seem,
as much as
they wanted to make this a
secret trip, it
seemed that Mexican authorities
probably had
a way to track them.
Almost every single person in
every tiny town
in Mexico knows who Kate del
Castillo is.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But take on
this issue.
You're a journalist. You have
covered this
story many, many years. You
teach young journalists.
Is there a circumstance that you
would ever
have agreed to these types of
conditions,
to let an actor go and interview
a kingpin
under these circumstances, with
these kind
of conditions put on it?
ANGELA KOCHERGA: I don't think
it's a -- we
would call it journalism.
You would call it a conversation
between an
actor and a drug lord. And that,
in and of
itself, the story behind the
story, is fascinating,
how they came together.
But we also have to remember,
although Chapo
says, yes, I know drugs kill,
but I do it
for -- because I was raised as a
poor person
in Mexico and there were no
other recourses,
I mean, those are real stories
in Mexico,that
there is real meat to that part
of it.
But he also runs the most brutal
drug -- one
of the most brutal drug cartels
in Mexico.
I covered the very violent years
in Ciudad
Juarez, the border city across
from El Paso,
Texas, and 10,000 people were
killed in the
span of about five years, as the
Sinaloa cartel,
run by Chapo, took on the local
hometown cartel,
the Juarez cartel, and there was
an absolute
bloodbath.
So, we can't forget the many,
many lives that
have been lost and the many
journalists who
have risked their lives trying
to tell these
stories and many others who have
been silenced.
There are entire regions of
Mexico that are
part of drug trafficking
strongholds, where
journalists cannot report
anything about the
drug cartel without prior
approval.
So, what Sean Penn did probably
is not new
for Mexican journalists, but he
obviously
faced none of the risks that
they face every
day.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, and
just for
the record, we did reach out to
"Rolling Stone,"
and they had no comment to offer
us.
But, Angela Kocherga, Walter
Cronkite School
of Journalism at Arizona State
University,
thank you so much.
ANGELA KOCHERGA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: concussions
in football
and the college game.
Fans are increasingly aware of
concussions
at the pro level. The most
recent example
was on Saturday, when Antonio
Brown of the
Pittsburgh Steelers suffered one
after a brutal
hit by Cincinnati linebacker
Vontaze Burfict.
Burfict could be facing
suspension.
Tonight, tens of millions of
viewers will
watch Clemson and Alabama face
off in college
football's championship game.
It's a big night
for the sport. But, like pro
football, one
question lingering throughout
the season is
how teams are handling
concussions.
Hari Sreenivasan has one look at
that in a
conversation he recorded
earlier.
Just as the NFL has taken new
steps to protect
players, some schools and teams
and the NCAA
have taken new precautions as
well. But when
it comes to college football,
schools have
more latitude on some decisions
and there
are questions about where a team
may take
too big a risk.
STAT, an online news site that
focuses on
health, medical and science, has
a report
exploring whether some players
with too many
concussions are still allowed to
play.
It tells it through the story of
a sophomore
quarterback, A.J. Long, who
played for Syracuse.
After he suffered his third
concussion, the
team's head doctor summoned him.
He was told
him he could no longer play at
Syracuse, but
A.J. wanted to keep playing
somehow.
Here's an excerpt from a video
by STAT featuring
A.J. and his father.
A.J. LONG, Former Syracuse
Football Player:
He was like, hey, from my
professional opinion,
I think that it would be best if
you didn't
play football anymore, so,
therefore, I'm
going to disqualify you from
continuing to
play contact sports at Syracuse
University.
When you hear those words, and
it's the final
verdict, it hurts and it shocks
you.
ACE LONG, Father of A.J. Long:
When the doctor
called, he was really vague.
Well, when you're
telling me that you're ending my
son's career,
you're worried about his
welfare, what is
this going to entail for the
rest of his life?
A.J. LONG: After my family doing
their research
and telling me that we're going
to go to a
specialist and we're going to
have them look
at it to tell us what they
think, because
this is what they do for living,
what I'm
hoping happens is that they look
at my brain
and they tell me my brain is
fine and it's
completely safe for me to
continue to play
the game that I love, in
football.
ACE LONG: The brain is something
that you
can't play with, but, you know,
it's hard
to put a value on the
competitive spirit.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David
Armstrong is a reporter
for STAT and joins me now from
Boston.
David, as you point out, and the
pictures
do in the piece, this is a kid
that has Syracuse
tattooed on his arm. He dreams
of playing
there. He wants it. You can tell
even from
this video that he wants to play
ball.
But the idea that he's
essentially now a free
agent and can be signed again by
another college,
even after he has this history
of concussions.
DAVID ARMSTRONG, STAT: Yes.
That's what was
really surprising to us, was
that a doctor
at one university thought that
his condition
was so perilous, and the danger
so extreme,
that he could never play contact
sports again
at that university is then able
to go out
and be recruited by other
schools, and there
is no NCAA regulation or
restriction on that.
So he is basically a free agent
now, with
several schools wooing him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how about
the tracking
on this? Is there any system
inside the NCAA?
You talked to a lot of different
colleges
and sought information from so
many different
schools. How do they know if
they're inheriting
an injured player?
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Well, there is
no real way
to know for sure.
The player might let them know
or they might
get some information from
someone they know
at another school, but the NCAA
doesn't keep
a list or a database of players
who are medically
disqualified. And what we found
was that we
approached the 65 schools that
are at the
upper echelon of college
football, and we
asked all of them for basic
information about
how many athletes are being
qualified for
concussions.
And only nine even responded to
us. And two
gave us the information we were
looking for.
So it's clearly a subject
they're not comfortable
speaking about. And at the
moment, there is
no real good solution that is
even being discussed
about how to make sure athletes
are being
protected for the long term.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you point
out that
there isn't any single standard
on exactly
how many concussions is too
many.
DAVID ARMSTRONG: That's true.
We talked to -- one of the more
interesting
people, I think, in the story is
the University
of Arizona head trainer. And he
told us that
he has disqualified a football
player for
a single concussion because it
was so severe,
but that, in another case, he
had a player
with 10 concussions throughout
his college
career and his high school
career that he
allowed to continue playing
because he didn't
think that the concussions were
so severe
as to disable him and to
incapacitate him
and disqualify him from the
team.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It almost
seems like the
player or the parents or the
family, their
dreams are their own worst
enemy. Here's a
student who knows what the
potential outcomes
are, at least with all the news
that we have
been seeing about what happens
to NFL players
with CTE later in their career,
some of them
who have suffered concussions on
the gridiron.
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Well, that's
right.
I mean, part of the problem here
is the science
and research into this issue is
still in its
infancy, and there is no real
good guidelines
on, for instance, how many
concussions are
too many. So, you have A.J. Long
and his family,
who have two diametrically
opposed opinions,
one from a doctor at Syracuse
who says, this
is too dangerous, you are not
playing anymore,
and then another one from a
concussion center
in Philadelphia, a very
reputable one, that
says, as of today, you are
cleared to play
full-contact football.
So, you can imagine the angst
over a decision
like that, when you have black
and white decisions
in front of you and evaluations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And those
decisions will
impact the rest of your, not
just playing
career, but, if you have a pro
career, perhaps
the rest of your financial life
as well.
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Right, because
we know that,
in many cases, there are
long-term effects
from these repeated blows to the
head.
So that's a calculation that the
family and
the player have to make. But
they're doing
so with information that's very
confusing
to them and in a system where
one school can
tell you, you can't play because
it's too
dangerous, and another school
says, come and
play for us.
So, that's why we want to
chronicle this story
and A.J.'s decision, because a
lot of athletes
are finding themselves in this
position.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What was the
reason that
the schools gave you when they
didn't give
you the information you were
looking for?
DAVID ARMSTRONG: They mostly
cited privacy
concerns, even though we didn't
ask for names
or identifying information of
that nature.
They said that we would be to,
in some cases,
figure out who the injured
athlete is, and,
therefore, that's a violation of
federal law
protecting student privacy and
also health
records.
In a lot of cases, we don't
agree with that.
And this is an area that we are
going to continue
to follow up on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, is there
any movement
by the schools in any kind of a
unified fashion
from the NCAA to figure this
out?
DAVID ARMSTRONG: None at all
that we can find.
It's one of those things where
the NCAA has
just sort of said, you know, the
schools that
are members of our organization,
you're on
your own. You figure it out. You
create your
own standard.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
David Armstrong
from STAT, thanks so much for
joining us.
DAVID ARMSTRONG: Thanks for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a look at
a writing program inside one of
the nation's
largest juvenile detention
facilities.
Jeffrey Brown has that story.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS, Poet: You
know the
truth of the quarrels and how
history lets
the blame go blameless for the
blood that
flows black in the streets.
JEFFREY BROWN: In a classroom
inside the Cook
County Temporary Juvenile
Detention Center
in Chicago, incarcerated young
people recently
gathered to hear poet Reginald
Dwayne Betts
read his work and take their
questions.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: That's
part of what
I meant by history, that it's
this bigger
thing that we have to understand
to even understand
our own lives.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you come to
a place like
this, what are you hoping to get
out of it?
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: I think,
honestly,
I'm trying to get them to pay
attention to
their own stories. So I will
read a poem to
them, I will talk to them, and
if I get them
to think about their own
stories, they get
to write their stories down and
kind of think
in a different way about how
their stories
shape the life that they have.
And if you
want a different life, you find
a way to tell
different stories.
JEFFREY BROWN: Betts should
know. As a teenager,
he was arrested for carjacking,
tried as an
adult, and spent
eight-and-a-half years in
prison.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: Yes,
because it's really
easy for me to walk in here and
say that,
you know, when I was 16 years
old, I got locked
up, and pretend like that's the
beginning
of the narrative or that's the
most important
part of the narrative, when, in
fact, I think
that it's not the most important
part of the
narrative.
And I don't want to define
myself that way,
because, in part, I don't want
you to define
yourselves that way.
JEFFREY BROWN: While still in
prison, Betts
read intensively, began writing
poetry and
completed high school. And since
getting out
in 2005, he's graduated from
college, earned
his master's, written a memoir
and two books
of poetry, and at age 35 is now
a third-year
student at Yale Law School.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: What I
want to do today
is to sort of let them know that
I believe
what doesn't look and what
doesn't seem to
be possible right now, but I
believe is possible
for them, because it is
implausible, but,
hey, implausible happens all the
time.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is one of
the nation's
largest juvenile detention
centers, on the
day we visited housing over 300
young people
aged 10 to 16 who are awaiting
trial. As a
condition to film this story, we
were required
to conceal their identities.
It's also home to a fully
functioning public
school, so students don't fall
behind on classwork
while here.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: I want
you to talk
in your voice.
JEFFREY BROWN: Betts visited
through a program
called Free Write Jail Arts and
Literacy,
which for 15 years has provided
tutoring and
creative writing instruction.
A native of Trinidad, Roger
Bonair-Agard is
a poet and teacher who
encourages his students
to find their voices using the
familiar language
and places around them.
ROGER BONAIR-AGARD, The Poetry
Foundation:
As you might imagine, the young
people here
have had who they are, and how
they talk,
and where they live devalued for
a very long
time.
And so the idea that those
voices and those
places should be brought to
something that
could eventually be this is
really important.
STUDENT: Why you looking at me
like that?
Why you looking at me? Because
I'm willing
to make a change based on my
mistakes?
JEFFREY BROWN: A student we
spoke with read
one of her new poems.
STUDENT: So I ask, why you
looking at me like
that? Speak. Tell me you
understand I'm more
than what you see. So, take that
chance and
get to know me.
That's all I have.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nice.
Why you looking at me like that,
huh?
STUDENT: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you feel like
that's going
on a lot?
STUDENT: Yes, not just me and,
like, others.
I found myself other people --
that's a common
thing people do. Me personally,
as a youth,
an African-American, I get
judged. I'm already
-- I'm detained right now, so I
get will judged
back because of that.
But, really, if people sit down
and get to
know me, like, such as yourself,
you will
know and learn that I'm a good
person, I'm
a good kid, and I'm not what
they think I
am. I'm much better than what
am.
RYAN KEESLING, Director, Free
Write Jail Arts
and Literacy: Our work is
grounded in narrative.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ryan Keesling is
the director
of Free Write.
RYAN KEESLING: Those issues are
their personal
issues that are serious, and
they need to
be processed in some way. Like,
we're not
coming and saying, oh, you did
this, or you
did that, you had this happen to
you, you
had this happen to you,
therefore, you are
this kind of person.
And we just allow those issues
to sort of
come to the surface, and
assemble pieces of
art that represent their
processing of those
experiences.
STUDENT: So, let me grab the
broken pieces,
and use my thoughts as glue, put
it all back
together, so I can at least have
a clue. Why
blame myself, when I can look
back at my roots,
and see myself as a young boy,
watching and
picking up what my father used
to do?
One day he said, son, come here.
Let me show
you how this works. He handed me
a handful
of crack and put a .22 on my
waistline, which
was hidden behind my shirt. He
said, there's
money to be made, and you will
find out what
it's worth, setting me up to die
early, which
say he ain't care about my
birth.
JEFFREY BROWN: In a place like
this, does
writing get you respect? It is
something you
-- that everybody knows you do,
or...
STUDENT: It's definitely
something everybody
know I do.
To me, like, they look at it as
like it's
a positive thing. And I love --
I love getting
praise for positive things,
because I didn't
do a lot of positive stuff when
I was out.
So doing something positive and
getting a
different reaction, it's like,
OK, I ain't
never felt this before.
So, I mean, why not keep going
with this,
you know?
JEFFREY BROWN: Things here
didn't always seem
so positive. In 1999, the ACLU
sued Cook County,
accusing the center of
overcrowding, unsanitary
conditions and abuse.
In 2007, the federal government
took over,
and through a transitional
administration,
the population dropped from more
than 800
residents to today's 300.
Last year, control was handed
over to Cook
County's office of the chief
judge, Timothy
Evans, who wants to maintain
that momentum.
TIMOTHY EVANS, Cook County Chief
Judge: I
think that we are changing, and
we have to
find a way to keep these people
who've gone
through the system from
returning to the system.
They have to be trained how to
get a job and
keep a job. They have to develop
skills. They
can't just be let out with $40
in their pocket
and expect, oh, they're going to
be fine.
LEONARD DIXON, Superintendent,
Cook County
Juvenile Temporary Detention
Center: Detention
is like the emergency room of
the juvenile
justice system.
JEFFREY BROWN: In charge of the
day-to-day
is superintendent Leonard Dixon,
who has run
juvenile institutions across the
country,
most recently in Detroit, and is
known as
a reformer.
LEONARD DIXON: I believe in
jails. I don't
have a problem with that. My
issue is, what
do you do with people when you
get them in
there, and what kind of services
are you providing,
so that you can get them back
out in society,
so they can do well?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. This
facility is predominantly
African-American.
LEONARD DIXON: Yes, it's...
JEFFREY BROWN: Far higher
percentage than
the county.
LEONARD DIXON: There's no
question about it;
96 percent of the kids in here
are kids of
color. And that's a question
that we need
to be asking, why is it that
way?
Is it a community? Is it the
courts? It's
-- all of it comes together.
It's the police
department. I mean, it's
everything. Everybody
has to come together to figure
out why.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dixon wants to
see more cases
dealt with outside these walls
through halfway
houses, shelters, churches, and
community
programs.
The Illinois state legislature
took one step
in that direction last year,
passing a bill
that aims to reduce the number
of minors automatically
tried as adults, except for the
most violent
crimes. It's one drop in a wave
of penal reform
now being discussed across the
country that
Reginald Dwayne Betts and others
have been
advocating.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: I do
think that a lot
of organizations around the
country, and they're
pushing to limit confinement to
when it's
-- only when it's necessary. And
they're pushing
to sort of find different ways
within a community
to treat young folks that have
gotten in trouble.
I think what we're still working
on now is
to have better outcomes.
While behind us, cell doors keep
clanking
closed, and Malik's casket door
clanks closed,
and the bodies that roll off the
block and
into the prisons and into the
ground keep
rolling, and no one will admit
that this is
the way America strangles
itself.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Chicago, I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Be sure to tune
in tomorrow
night, when Jeff talks with
Reginald Dwayne
Betts about his upbringing, his
time in prison,
and how he found poetry.
On our Web site now, you can
watch Betts read
one of his new works titled "For
the City
That Nearly Broke Me." That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will preview the
State of the
Union address with the
president's chief of
staff, followed by live
coverage.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.